The FDA will require you to provide
an intended use statement and an indication
for use statement when you submit your algorithm.
The intended use statement tells the FDA exactly what your algorithm is used for,
not what it could be used for.
For example, the intended use of your algorithm
could be to identify if cancer is malignant or benign,
or just identify if there is a suspicious mass.
The FDA will use this statement to define the risk and class of your algorithm.
You can then use your indications for use statement to make
more specific suggestions about how your algorithm could be used.
We talked in lesson 1 about the three FDA risk categories,
and that they were generally low, medium,
and high, and which regulatory pathway each of these needed to go down.
Let's go a little deeper today into
the FDA's actual definitions of these risk categories.
The FDA defines class I devices as those not intended for use in
supporting or sustaining life or of
substantial importance in preventing impairment to human health,
and they may not present a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.
These devices are the most common class of devices regulated by the FDA,
constituting 47 percent of approved devices on the market.
Class 1 devices have minimal contact with
patients and low impact in patient's overall health.
In general, class 1 devices do not come into contact with the patient's internal organs,
the central nervous system, or cardiovascular system.
These devices are subject to the fewest regulatory requirements.
The FDA defines class II devices as those devices for which
general controls are insufficient to provide
a reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device.
What does this phrase about "general controls being insufficient," really mean?
According to the FDA,
it means that you can't just put extra labeling and
guidelines on your device to ensure that it's safe and effective.
You still need to do these things,
but you also need to show that your device is something called
substantially equivalent to something called a predicate device.
This doesn't mean that the devices need to be identical,
but they require significant similarities in use,
design, materials, labeling, standards, and other characteristics.
This substantial equivalence is specific to the 510(k) process,
and it is what most AI for medical imaging software algorithms end up going down.
Class II medical devices are more complicated than class I,
and present a higher category of risk because they are
more likely to come into sustained contact with a patient.
This can include devices which come into contact with
a patient's cardiovascular system or internal organs,
as well as diagnostic tools.
The FDA defines class III devices as those that usually sustain or support life,
are implanted or present a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.
Just 10 percent of the devices regulated by the US FDA fall into class III.
This classification is generally extended to permanent implants,
smart medical devices, and life support systems.
A device that may have initially been put into class II may be bumped up to class III if
the manufacturer can't demonstrate
substantial equivalence to a predicate during the FDA process.